What was your background situation at the time you
joined the church, and how do you think it affected
your decision to join? At the time that I joined, I
was a sophomore in college at Kansas State
University. I first met a group of three people who
identified themselves as members of a unified
family. In November of 1972, they just invited me
over to have a meal with them and to talk with some of
their ideas about engendering cooperation
between different denominations and working for
social change. Well, it happened to hit me in a very
sensitive spot. I had gone to Kansas State
University in the midst of a rather difficult
decision about whether I would be involved with
war or not and had decided to be a conscientious
objector. I was very serious about faith matters.
I'd even changed churches while I was a senior in
high school in order to become involved in a church
that had peace ideals. I was involved with student
government and was studying English to be an
English as a second language teacher because I
felt a very strong sense of social
responsibility. Also, on a personal level, I had
experienced and did continue to experience
through this sophomore year a large number of
disappointments with friends, with a girlfriend
I was involved with. And also with classes,
professors. It was just a very difficult year as a
sophomore year often is. How do you think that
affected your decision to join the church? Well, I
don't think that I would have been so... Well, of
course, you have to remember the time this was.
People were not talking about a cult, and nobody
knew anything about the Unification Church. I
didn't find out that the name of it was Unification
Church until April when I joined, as a matter of
fact. But that didn't make any difference to me
then anyway, because nobody knew anything about
it at that point in the early 70s in Kansas. I think
that they had been going on the coast for a while,
and a few people knew, but... I still think,
though, that there were a lot of things about the
group that I found very strange. Some of their
theological ideas I just sort of brushed off as
being off the wall, but they were nice people, and I
had worked with people with whom I had differences
before. But I don't think I would have been so
willing to make the kind of commitment that I made
to them had I not been in a situation where I just
desperately needed friendship, some people who
were planning to be consistent, and also some
structure in my life. I had a lot of difficult
decisions to make and nobody really helped me make
them. I had kind of cut myself adrift from my family
in a number of different ways, not that we had
always been that close, but particularly with my
decision to be a CO, my father, who had been in both
the Army and the Air Force, was not at all happy
about that, as you can well imagine. And so I had a
hard time drawing on people. And some of the people
who I depended on I had fallen out of my life. I had
grown close to a girl during high school, but we
were unable to make things work out on weekends to
be able to spend time together, so that
relationship sort of dwindled.
The president of the student body and I became very
close friends and decided to move in together
during the sophomore year. And he had a house that
he was renting and one of his roommates had moved
out, so I moved in at semester break. Well, he left
school. of his responsibilities and left me with a
house to rent. So there were just a lot of very
difficult things happening. I do think that it
would have been much less likely that I would have
gotten involved as a member had I been at a more
stable position in life. Do you think there are
common personality traits or common past
experiences among Unification Church members?
That's an interesting question.
I don't really think that you would say common
personality traits. in that you would find all
kinds of people in Unification Church. By far, the
majority of the members were young, that is to say,
college age to early 30s, white middle class.
I would say there was probably a fairly large
number of Roman Catholics involved in
relationship to the population of the United
States, but that's just a guess. I mean, that's a
pure guess. I have no data on that at all. Very low
percentage of minorities, almost no blacks at
all, very few Hispanics. Very few people from
either lower income groups
or the very, very wealthy. Again, that's sort of a
guess. The lower income groups I would say pretty
definitely.
Different groups of this type, fringe groups that
are often identified as cults, such as the
Children of God and the Hare Krishna movement,
seem to exhibit sort of the same kind of profile.
Other groups, like the Jim Jones People's Temple,
seem to draw on a different group. For them, it was
mostly middle-aged and older blacks.
So, you know, different groups seem to attract
different kinds of individuals in terms of age
groups and that sort of thing. But as far as
personality, I would hesitate to say. I think that
everybody has the propensity or the capacity for
making sort of fanatical commitments. I mean, we
all need something that we can really believe in, I
think, and something that we can commit ourselves
to. We all need to feel like we're right and we're
doing something good. And I think that's a human
trait and not necessarily just a personality
trait of some people. I think that's a need that we
all have, and that's what the Church draws on to a
great degree.
When church members first approached you, did
they reveal affiliation with Moon? Or how long
were you acquainted with them before they
revealed that they were affiliated with Moon?
Well, the name Sun Myung Moon didn't mean anything
to me at that time. I didn't know anything about
him. But no, they didn't talk about it at all until I
got ready to join the group, which was in April. So
from November to April, five or six months,
however long that is. I did not know that it was the
Unification Church. Again, that name didn't mean
anything to me. I probably would have liked it, as a
matter of fact. But as far as I knew, it was called
the Unified Family, and that's all I knew. And what
did they declare their beliefs to be? Initially,
they did not declare that they had an independent
theology. It was more like this is an ecumenical
organization, which I assumed, and which many
people did assume, and they wanted you to assume,
you know, they led you to assume, that it was a group
that rather than having independent ideas, was
simply an organization with service ideals. And
that was very attractive to me. As time went on,
they said we should come over to our lecture
series. And I realized that they did have a
specific theology. And some of the ideas in the
theology really took me aback. I was just really
shocked. The idea that the Fall of Man was
essentially a sexual act. I
didn't want to laugh, but I found it pretty
bizarre. And frankly, I think the ramifications
of that were at some level sort of evident to me when
they first told me that. I thought, gee, you could
really get the real warped view of the world with
that kind of an idea. Or I shouldn't say warped.
That shows my own bias. But I just thought that
would really affect your world view in an extreme
way. And that was the point where I said, well, I've
worked with people with whom I had differences
before, who had different opinions. So it didn't
really upset me that much. But it was a month or so
after I'd first met them. I should tell you, Oh, I
probably didn't actually go out to the center
until December when we got past finals. I was a
little bit freer in terms of time, and I think I saw
them once, maybe twice before January. And then I
didn't see them again for a couple of months. I got
back into the swing of school and just didn't make
time to go out there. I didn't feel the tug that
strongly. They sent food home with me, which was a
good ploy to use with a male who was living on his
own. But...
I don't think I really heard any of the lectures
until probably March.
Would you say that the social responsibility was
your initial attraction to the
group? Well, yeah, also there was a strong
personal attraction in that
The people were obviously very dedicated and
obviously willing to make a lot of sacrifices.
They lived very simply and that was attractive to
me. They obviously had an interest in me.
One of the girls in the group I found rather cute and
interesting, although I don't think a person who I
would have spent a lot of time with, but I felt like
our personalities had a lot in common, and I would
have enjoyed getting to know her better. The other
two, not so much, but...
Obviously it was a combination of personal and
ideological
reasons. How were you first approached by members
of the church? I was in the cafeteria at K-State. As
a church member, you develop an ability through
hours and days and weeks and months of attempting
to make solicitations and proselytizations. You
develop a sense for who is going to be accessible.
and they sense that I would be right away. I think
there's a number of things involved with that. I'm
willing to go up to people and make friends, you
know, walk up and make contacts. I'm open to new
things. A fairly... sensitive, emotional
person. And I think that ends up what the person's
emotional state, whether they're at a pretty
stable place going along day to day, or whether
they're in a state of emotional flux, and they're
up and down. And experiencing a lot of emotion
makes a lot of difference in terms of how
suggestible people are. And I was probably pretty
evidently at a point of some emotional flux at that
time. I'm sure they picked up on that as well. The
church members don't end up verbalizing a lot of
that stuff. Some of them do. Some of them are more
aware of it than others. I think the ones who are the
best at it, sensitive and intuitive level, they
don't even think about it. They know. During
those first few contacts, were you ever exposed to
the church's views on communism? Not at all. I
wasn't particularly pro or anti-communist, so it
wouldn't have made much difference. But no, they
were careful not to talk about... I think that they
may have mentioned it, but they certainly didn't
dwell on it. And that didn't end up being a big thing
one way or the other for me. They really talked... I
mean, it was like a whole other group once I became
involved. There was just so little that they
actually told me about the group. Because there is
such a superstructure of ideology and theology
and strange ideas and reading of the speeches of
Moon and all that kind of stuff. There's a great
deal of that that goes on in the group. But that's
all hidden from the outside. And there's an
extremely intense interpersonal structure that
every individual has his own personal leader to
whom he or she is responsible. And
that string goes all the way up to moon in a very
intense fashion. And there's a lot of
interpersonal manipulation that goes on all the
way up. The idea of being loyal is an extremely high
ideal and an effective means of control.
But that's also hidden. You don't see any of that
kind of stuff. It's just sort of like, well, they go
to talk to different churches and have wonderful
ideals. And it's not until you become involved
that you find out that the major activities for the
group are fundraising, proselytizing, and
trying to expand their political influence in
terms of the ideology. That's really all that gets
done. And the leadership of the church is very
aware of that. I was at a speech given by one of the
Japanese leaders in Japan. He talked about that.
Those are the three main things. They talk about
building the heavenly kingdom on a basis of a...
of example, that by establishing perfect
families that are in harmony with God, then
they're going to demonstrate how the world is
supposed to be. So they do believe that they're in
the process of building this kind of a kingdom and
that sort of thing. And there are people who join
the group and quit drugs because of it or that kind
of stuff. So they're involved with drug
rehabilitation. That's the kind of thinking that
goes on. The kind of social service that they're
involved in is proselytizing and fundraising. So
after you first met those first few church
members, what was the first activity that you went
to or group meeting? Well, there were only three
people in the center, only three people in the
state of Kansas who were involved in the church at
that time when I first met them. And I went over and
just had a meal with them. And they sang some songs,
which I found pretty crazy. But as a musician,
music is fun. I think that I was given lectures
individually. As I recall, they would actually
sit down and give the lectures to me on a one-to-one
basis later in the spring. But the first couple
times that I saw them, I just went over and had lunch
with them. Later on, after I... I think all of the
lectures that I attended were on a personal,
individual, under one basis. Now that's of course
atypical. That's not at all typical for the way
most people join. But after that, the first group
activities I was involved in was as a member, being
involved in the church prayer meetings and stuff
like that. What is the typical way that most people
become involved then?
I think in terms of where most people are when
they're approached, most people who join the
group have fallen into the category of being at a
more emotional point of their life. They're in
situations where maybe they've had some great
joy, they've just gotten married, or they've just
moved into a new community, or maybe they've gone
away to college. And these kinds of periods of
upheaval can last for years. A person who's in
college, it just hardly ever ends.
But in any event, being in an emotional time of
life, one tends to be somewhat less reasoned and
connected to one's surroundings. You're going
more on your own feelings. And a college student
is, of course, the most unconnected person in our
society, except maybe for the hobo.
So there's that sort of thing. And what the church
ordinarily does is meets these people on the
street or on the college campus, invites them to a
dinner and a lecture on some topic that they think
will be of interest to people who are in that
demographic area. So that is to say, when they're
talking to people on the Berkeley campus, they're
going to be approaching them somewhat
differently than they will be when they're at the
K-State campus, for example, or in the train
station in Oklahoma City. But they try to aim for
something that is a sort of low common denominator
and yet still is going to interest people who may be
susceptible. So they're not going to be as likely
to go after a person who's basically agnostic,
happily married, with a good, secure job with
Donald Lynch. They're going after people who have
some interest in different kinds of religious
ideas and ideals, and people to whom an ideal city
project might be interesting, or that sort of
thing. They invite them over to a dinner and a
lecture. They will deliver a lecture on the ideal
family or the ideal world, using things that come
from Christian theology and also from Buddhism.
Pretty innocuous. somewhat bland, but very
fervent. And the room in which they have the
lecture, there will be many members of the church
there. They will try to have as many members per new
person as possible. About a one-to-one ratio is
ideal. But there are times when they may have more
new people than they have members. But in those
instances, it's very hard for them to control the
energy in the room and control the atmosphere.
Then that's what they really want to do. They will
sing songs. They may have prayers. It depends. San
Francisco, they probably won't. But in Des
Moines, they will, definitely. Or in Dallas.
And then after that they'll invite them to go to a
weekend workshop. And the fee, if any, will be
minimal. At the weekend workshop, they will
receive the same introductory lecture with
somewhat more elaboration. And then they'll go
through the whole series of the divine principle
to greater or lesser detail, depending on the
situation and the lecturer. And at the end of that,
the people who are interested, the lectures are
set up in such a way that they have real emotional
impact. psychological hooks.
Anyway, at the end of the weekend lecture series,
and they'll invite them to go to a week-long
lecture series. And the people who go to the
week-long lecture series, it's a pretty high
percentage of people joining. And some people
even join after a weekend. But the people who go to
the... If you can get them away from their home for a
week to work together and to sing together and, you
know, the very intense... working on people on a
one-to-one basis with a great deal of love and
personal interest. So it's pretty effective. I
should talk a little about the way the lecture
series is structured because the ideas in and of
themselves, I think again, seem probably rather
innocuous and a little bit all kind of quirky and
funny, but certainly not malignant. The thing is,
is that the way the lecture series is delivered and
organized, it makes people feel personal
responsibility. It's designed to make people
feel personal responsibility for the state of the
world. The first lecture is one that, as I said,
talks about the ideal world, the ideal family that
got it intended
in the beginning. And the second lecture speaks
about the fall of man, which is identified as
being, and with some rather interesting proof
texting and rather convoluted reasoning,
identifies the fall of man as essentially being a
physical relationship or spiritual
relationship, in any event a sexual one, which was
premature. And since it was premature before the
individuals had fully developed on an individual
basis, they established a dependency which
should not have existed for ideal love. It was a
needing neurotic kind of love that they became
involved in. And because of that, they say, then
true parents, perfect parents who can give love
unconditionally never developed because the
children born out of that first
experience were never given that kind of love
themselves. So there was this endless cycle of...
Parents who didn't know fully how to love giving
birth to children who also didn't learn it. And the
thing that this does is that it plugs into
everyone's own anxieties and feelings of guilt
about desires for premarital sex. which is a big
guilt thing in our society. And as the lecture
series goes on, they talk about how the Jews failed
to unite with Christ, and a lot of the ideas of the
Christology are very strange, and they lose a lot
of Christians there. And some of the lecturers
really soft-pedal a lot of that stuff. But when
they start talking about history, they talk about
cycles in history, and they begin using some very
interesting numbers drawn from the Bible without
even maintaining that these are actually
factually true, but rather that they're
symbolically important, and that's the reason
they're in the Bible. start setting up parallels
between the coming of Christ and what you discover
much later to be the coming of some man at the
beginning of this century. And some of the
similarities which had been noted by historians
before between the history of the Christian
church and the history of the Jewish people are
very striking. 40-year periods, 300-year
periods, and that sort of thing.
The papal captivity in Avignon, or the banishment
to Avignon, is sometimes referred to as the
Babylonian captivity, and that sort of thing. And
some very interesting parallels. Probably the
most striking part of the lecture series, as far as
I was concerned. And what this does is that by
saying that in this century we have a chance that
mankind hasn't had for 2,000 years to make changes
and to do things, and we've been brought to this
point because you're a person who's been selected
by God to participate in this process. And you have
gifts and things that mankind needs. That message
is put however explicitly it is present. It's very
powerful. It's very attractive and also very
manipulative. The church has no qualms about
having individual members They push having
individual members develop as strong a
relationship as possible with the prospective
converts, exhibiting a great deal of interest in
them personally, listening for long hours to them
talk about themselves if necessary, or do
whatever is necessary. But in general, just try to
make them feel loved, make them feel wanted. And
they want to. It's a natural kind of thing. It's
manipulative, yes, but it's also sincere.
Anyway, by doing that, they often engender a lot of
these chapter two feelings, as they talk about,
that is to say, feelings of physical attraction.
And then those feelings are engendered, and then
the person is made to feel guilty about those
feelings. And it's another example. And the
fallen nature for the church is expressed in two
ways. One, in being physically attracted to a
person of the opposite sex or the same sex as a man.
Or in insubordination. So those two... human
tendencies are the ones that get to be the target of
a lot of
very negative feelings and a lot of negative
discussion.
Were you encouraged to confess all these guilty
feelings to another member? Yeah, definitely. As
I mentioned before, each member has his or her own
personal leader, they pattern all the
relationships on the relationship of Cain and
Abel. That's not to say that they're supposed to
kill each other, but rather they examine the story
of Cain and Abel for what the problems were. And the
thing was is that they...
believe that Abel was in a position of being closer
to God because of reversals caused by the Fallen.
There's no sense going into all this theology, but
in any event, that's sort of the source of the
story. And that Cain was responsible to overcome
his own feelings of superiority, more
experience, being in the firstborn position,
overcome all of those natural jealous feelings,
and feeling like he was more qualified, all that
sort of stuff, and accept Abel's leadership. and
thereby become close to God. And so, all
relationships are established on that basis, and
that the person who is the leader is in the able
position, and the person who is the follower is in
the keen position. Now, this gets... There's a
great deal of very convoluted discussion
and...
Well, Moon will at different times say, you don't
know who's in the Cain position. You don't know
who's in the evil position. Both must act as though
they are Cain to try to help overcome some of the
natural inequities that come about, as you can
imagine, in those kinds of situations where one
person is kind of established as being closer to
God than the other. The potential for
some pretty ridiculous overcompensation is
observed sometimes in the church. But
since you have an individual who is in that
position between you and God, then you are
encouraged to confess to them, to tell them all of
your feelings, to tell them about your past, about
the things you've done wrong. This gives them a
great deal of power over you. And that is also
passed on to their immediate able, that sort of
thing, on and on.
The initial doubts that you described about the
group, how were those overcome? And was it a long
process? I don't
think they were really...
Those doubts were feelings as much as ideas. I
would
say that in terms of the ideas being overcome, that
was mostly a matter of choice. And that choice was
motivated by my emotional commitment to the
people. Is that if these people are what they say
they are and this is what this is, then I need to just
simply buckle down and accept this and learn to
understand it. And that's really the approach
that the church takes, that doubts and those sorts
of things are evidence of individual guilt,
guiltiness, sin. And so one, in the first place,
doesn't want to admit it because it's evidence of
one's own shortcomings. And when one does, it's
the process of overcoming it. In terms of the
feelings of doubt and stuff, sort of the same
thing. It was sort of a choice to do that. Although,
as I said, the choice was essentially a
manipulated choice. I was deciding on the basis of
how wonderful these people were and how wonderful
they were to me, which I thought was evidence of
this being the right thing. And didn't realize
that there was a structure that had been...
designed to do that very thing, to attract people
and get them involved. But those were still in
place when it came to the time that I was confronted
with the breakdown of the day-to-day structure
that was so important in keeping people in the
group, the enforced ritual of of early rising and
meals, work, all that stuff that kept you very
busy. When I was confronted with the breakdown of
that, with the incredible pain that my family had
gone through because of this, those doubts were
still fresh in my mind. Now that's not to say that I
was in the process of doubting the church at that
time. I wasn't. But I still remembered those
feelings and those thoughts that I had. And I could
understand how people could feel that way about
the church. I could understand positions opposed
to the church very well. And essentially for me,
leaving the church was a process... of realizing
that my commitment was a manipulated commitment.
And so my break with the church came on the basis of
realizing that I did not have an authentic
commitment to the church at all, but rather one
that was based on... That's Pastor Clark. That's a
fast clock. Paul, you need to be quiet because this
machine is taping everything you're saying. My
commitment was a, as I said, a manipulated one and
not one that I had chosen on the basis of this being
the best idea. And the anger that I experienced at
realizing that I had been manipulated and been
used rather than making the choice and committing
myself to it. The anger that I felt was the thing
that really freed me from that control. And once I
realized that, I knew what all the problems of the
church were. Some former members describe a loss
of ability to think rationally during the
introduction period. Would you use that
description concerning yourself?
Yeah, I would say, as I said, the introduction
period was not an intensive weekend for me like it
was for other people. What was happening to me at
that time was that I was at a point of tremendous
flux in my own personal life, which made me more
liable to make choices on the basis of what felt
good and what felt right. And the thing is, is that I
think as growing up as a Christian, I had always,
you know, you're taught to look for the gifts of the
Spirit and long-sufferingness and love and that
sort of thing. And I wasn't finding that in my
friends. I'll be very frank about that. The
relationships that I had at that time were not
terribly satisfying. And I think that becoming an
adult, whether one is involved in the church, that
is, the Christian church or whatever, or not, is a
process of learning how to develop good, solid,
loving relationships, which is not easy. Because
when it is done by both members choosing to do it and
choosing to make a commitment, it's very
difficult. The thing that happens with the church
is that the individuals involved with
proselytizing know that that kind of love and
affection is what everybody needs and what
everybody's looking for. And so they're willing
to give it to you in triple doses during that
introductory period and that indoctrination
period, but they can't afford to keep giving it
afterwards. So you get lots of lumps of brown sugar
during the indoctrination period. And
essentially, that's what you're looking for is
evidence that these are good people and that this
is a good thing to become involved with. But those
lumps of brown sugar don't continue to come after
you join. You have to work harder and harder to get
them. So yeah, I think a loss of the ability, a loss
of the desire and the need for it. You know, when
you're experiencing the kind of love and
attention that you've always wanted and really
haven't had since you were a child. then rational
evidence is much less important. And I think
anybody who's really familiar with human nature
and with people and working with people knows that
that's the case. It's just that we try to be honest
with each other as well as loving. And that's the
thing that the Church does not do at all. They're
very conscious of extreme levels of deception.
They call it heavenly deception and they deny that
that exists. Of course they deny it exists.
But, yeah, at the time that if somebody asked them
if Sun Myung Moon is the Messiah, they may be honest
enough to say, well, what do you think? But for them
to come out and say yes would be against the tenets
of the Church, even though that's exactly what
they believe. So I guess in the long run, yes, the
answer is yes, that you do experience a loss of
ability to think rationally. Or what I would say
is, more than that, loss of the ability to make
choices based on rationality, because you're
getting this overload of... of emotional
information that I think makes it very difficult
to say, well, you know, these are really great
people, maybe the most loving people I've ever
met. They obviously love each other very much.
It's a great organization. A real paradigm of what
relationships should be like. But I think their
theology is a mess, so I'm not going to be involved.
That's not the way you decide. There's a place
in... one of Jesus' prayers that's recorded,
where it talks about... You know, I pray that these
people would love each other so that the world may
know that I am Christ. And I think that's what we
look for. We look for love between individuals.
And as Christians, we certainly look for love
within the church as evidence that Christ is alive
and working among us. And so when you see that
happen, it's hard to say, boy, theology sure is a
mess. I don't think this is real. Because you don't
realize it's not real.
In your opinion then, did you identify more with
Moon and his Divine Principle, or with the group
and the communal living? Oh, definitely the
latter. The identification with Moon was
predicated on everything else. Although, he is a
very charismatic individual, and when I first
observed him, it confirmed a lot of things for me,
in the sense that I remember the sense of every
motion that he made being very definite. He's one
of these people who walks through a room and you
notice him. He's aggressive in a sense, but not
aggressive in an angular, jerky way. He's just
very deliberate. And a real natural leader.
There's no doubt about it. Tremendous
charismatic personality. And also capable of
exhibiting
human concern, although you don't know whether
that's by choice or by nature. And it doesn't
really matter. It has the same effect either way.
How do the group dynamics of the Unification
Church differ from other groups in society?
Well...
My first inclination is to say there's no
comparison.
There's no place in society outside of possibly
the army. But even in the army, there is always a
sense that you're going to be out in two years. Or if
it really came down to it, this leader could be
subject to court martial or something like that.
There is never a sense in the church that there is
any recourse beyond that immediate leader.
With the army, you know that you have, there's a
certain set of rules by which everybody lives. And
I suppose in the church there's an element of that
too. But really when it comes down to the
one-to-one level, the person who is the immediate
leader has a great deal of authority over the
individual member. Thank you. Everything about
one's life, one is responsible to share with one's
able. One's dreams, one's fantasies. Moon
determines who you're going to marry. The church
administration decides primarily what kind of
work you're going to be involved with.
I experienced times in the church where
we essentially were told to give up all of our
personal possessions. I was told to give away all
of my clothes and only wear clothes that had been
given to me by other members. I was told to cut my
hair and shave my beard when I first joined, and I
did it basically without question. But realizing
that this becoming like a child, in a sense, was the
ideal. And this ideal of becoming like a child in
accepting unquestionably
any directive which comes to you is a real ideal
within the church. Now, of course, that breaks
down sometimes. But it is...
an extreme level of commitment. And it's not just
the people who decide to become monks or become
priests. It's every individual. The lack of
personal space is, I think, an extreme one. While
in many religious orders one is encouraged to have
a personal meditative life and things like that in
the church you're encouraged to have personal
prayers and stuff like that you're told about how
they're supposed to be and
hardly given enough time to do it on top of that it's
really it's extremely intense and i think that
it's possible i was reading in one book that talked
about thought reform in China, by Robert Lifton,
Thought Reform and Psychology of Totalism, I
think, how it is possible with certain
individuals to have tremendous periods of
personal growth within that kind of intensity of
environment. And some people do actually opt for
that. You know, monasticism is that kind of a
tradition. The thing that happens with the
Unification Church is that rather than taking a
long time to prepare and everybody trying to
discourage you and make sure that this is exactly
what you want to do and you know what you're getting
yourself into, They deliberately prevent you
from finding what you're into, but by the use of
emotional pressure, try to persuade you to get
into it and make you feel guilty for trying to get
out. So the manipulation happens at an extremely
personal level, the most personal level as
possible. I felt horrible guilt about having wet
dreams. And, well, the sexual repression in the
group was extreme. And for a young man 19 years old,
something's just going to happen. That's all
there is to it. But I felt tremendous guilt because
I thought that this was... spiritual sexual
experiences you know this is the fall all over
again and here I am in the midst of God's you know
wonderful family and how can this be happening and
that sort of thing so if it were on the basis of
people knowing exactly what they were getting
into being counseled and time being taken to find
out whether this is something they really wanted
to do and commit themselves to or not it would be one
thing but to be deceived um in such a wholesale way
as one is during the indoctrination process,
during the introductory and proselytizing
stages. I hesitate to use the word proselytize
because I don't think it's really a
proselytization process. It's really a matter of
being manipulated. It's like
people trying to take money away from elderly
people by offering them love and affection and
that sort of stuff. It's much more similar to that
than it is any other kind of process. So that gets a
little away from your question, I suppose. But
it's not really similar in terms of group process
at all. There's no democracy of choice. There's no
group decision making of any kind. All of it is
authoritarian. So, very little similarity.